It's very easy to remember
exactly which organs the cardiovascular
system includes when you break down
its word parts. Cardio means heart and vascular refers to
the blood vessels, so the cardiovascular system consists of the heart
and the blood vessels. The heart's job is to pump our blood into the
blood vessels. The blood vessels then
carry our blood full of oxygen to all of our
organs and tissues. They then return our blood
full of waste products back to our heart for
disposal in the lungs. We have blood vessels in the
lungs that we refer to as the pulmonary
circulation because these vessels carry blood
to and from the lungs. The rest of our
blood vessels make up our systemic circulation because they carry blood to
and from the entire body. We start this lesson with some basic facts
about the heart. How big is your heart? It is approximately the
size of a fist. Where is your heart located? It is found between the lungs, close to the anterior
wall of the chest, between the second
and the sixth rib. One-third of the heart is actually to the left
of your midline. What shape is the heart? The heart is cone-shaped
with the tip of the cone pointing downwards
towards the left hip. How much does your heart weigh? The average heart weighs
about 9-10 ounces, so a little over 1/2 a pound. How much does the heart beat? The heart beats about
125,000-150,000 times per day. This adds up to 45-50 million beats per year and about four billion
beats over our lifetime. During that time,
the heart will pump approximately 75 million
gallons of blood, which is enough to fill 120
Olympic size swimming pools. Does the heart have any
protective covering? Yes, it does. The heart is enclosed in a double-walled sac
called the pericardium. It's easy to remember
the term pericardium. If you break the word down
to peri meaning around, cardio meaning heart, and um is your noun ending. Its tough outer layer
forms a fibrous sac around the heart and is called
the parietal pericardium. The inner layer of
the pericardium is called the
visceral pericardium. There is a small space between the parietal pericardium and
the visceral pericardium, which is called the
pericardial cavity. This cavity is filled with
a tiny amount of fluid that acts as a lubricant to reduce friction when
the heart beats. 


Now that you know some basic
facts about the heart, we can learn more about
the heart's anatomy. The wall of the heart
has three layers. The outer layer is
called the epicardium. It consists of a
single layer of cells. The outer layer of the
heart is called the epicardium because epi is
the prefix that means above, cardio is the word
root that means heart, and um is your noun ending. The middle layer consists of spiral bundles of
cardiac muscle cells, therefore it is called
the myocardium. Recall that myo is your
word root for muscle, cardio means heart, and
um is your noun ending. The innermost layer is
formed by an epithelium, covering the inside
of the heart wall. It is called the endocardium. Recall that endo means inside, cardio means heart, and
um is your noun ending. The endocardium continues as the innermost layer
of the blood vessels, where it is then called
the endothelium. I introduced that the
heart has four chambers, two atria and two ventricles. Let's review the functions
of these four chambers. The atria are the two upper
chambers of the heart. They are the receiving chambers with a thin muscle layer only. The right atrium
receives blood coming back from our body's
organs and tissues. The left atrium receives blood coming back
from the lungs. The atria are separated by a thin wall called the
interatrial septum. A septum is a wall that
separates two chambers. The word interatrial
comes from inter, which means between, atrial for atrium, and al is your adjective ending. The ventricles are the two
lower chambers of the heart. They are the pumping chambers
with thick muscular walls. They are separated by an equally thick and muscular
interventricular septum. The word interventricular comes from inter meaning between, ventriculo meaning ventricle, and al which is your
adjective ending. 

The right ventricle
pumps blood into the arteries that lead
only to the lung. Whereas the left ventricle
pumps blood into arteries supplying all of the other
body organs and tissues, including the heart
muscle cells themselves. The border between the atria and the ventricles can be seen even on the
outside of the heart. This border forms a
horizontal groove or indentation called the
atrioventricular groove. The atria are above the groove and the ventricles
are below the groove. Because the coronary
artery supplying the heart muscle with
oxygen run in this groove, it is also called
the coronary sulcus. The term sulcus refers
to a groove or a furrow. We can also see the more vertical indentation between the ventricles on
the surface of the heart. The shallow groove
between the ventricles on the anterior aspect of the heart is called the anterior
interventricular sulcus. The shallow groove on
the posterior aspect of the heart is called the posterior
interventricular sulcus. When we look at the
heart from the front, the right ventricle
is to the right of the anterior
interventricular sulcus and the left ventricle is to
the left of this sulcus. The atria themselves cannot
be seen from the outside as they are covered by two structures that
resemble dog ears. We call these ear-like
covering structures auricles, which means little ears. Their function is to
increase the volume of the atria to receive
and hold more blood.