Let's switch gears now and talk about the basics of blood vessels. Arteries carry blood away from the heart. The big artery that carries blood
away from the right ventricle is called the pulmonary trunk. It this artery goes to the lungs and is the beginning of
the pulmonary circulation. The pulmonary trunk immediately splits
into smaller arteries called the right and left pulmonary arteries. The big artery that carries blood away
from the left ventricle is called the aorta. The aorta is the biggest
artery of the body. It forms the start of
the systemic circulation. We have arteries that supply the heart
muscle itself with blood full of oxygen and nutrients. These arteries are called
the coronary arteries. They form what looks like
an upside down crown. So that's how they got their name. Corona in Latin means crown. The blood vessels returning blood
to the atria are called veins. The two biggest veins of
the systemic circulation are the superior and inferior vena cava. Both of these large veins empty
directly into the right atrium. We also have the pulmonary veins. These important vessels return blood from
the lungs to the left atrium of the heart. The only way to make sure that our blood
always moves in the correct direction through our heart is with
the use of heart valves. The heart valves prevent blood from
flowing backwards the wrong way. There are four heart valves. They are called the tricuspid valve,
the pulmonary valve, the mitral valve and the aortic valve. If any of these valves is
not working correctly, blood does not flow properly and
effectively through the heart. We have valves located at the junction
of the atria and the ventricles. They are called the atrioventricular
valves or AV valves for short. Their job is to keep blood flowing
from the atria into the ventricles. The atrioventricular valve on
the right side is also known as the tricuspid valve because
it has 3 cusps or flaps. The AV valve on the left side
of the heart is also known as the bicuspid valve or mitral valve. It has two flaps so
it is known as the bicuspid valve. However, we often use the name mitral
valve because early anatomists thought that it resembled the shape of
a bishop's hat which is called a miter. An easy mnemonic to help you
remember that the tricuspid valve is on the right side of the heart and
the bicuspid valve is on the left side is to think of learning to ride a tricycle
before you learn how to ride a bicycle. The valves guarding the exit out
of the ventricles are designed to let blood flow out of
the ventricles into the arteries. These valves should prevent backflow
into the ventricles because they are half moon shaped. They are called semilunar valves or
just SL valves. Semi means half and lunar means moon. The semilunar valve on the right side
of the heart regulates blood flow from the right ventricle
into the pulmonary artery. Thus, it is also called
the pulmonary valve. The semilunar valve on the left side
of the heart regulates blood flow from the left ventricle into the aorta. Therefore, we call it the aortic valve.