[MUSIC] The blood vessels can be
thought of as tubes or pipes that travel throughout
your entire body. Unlike water pipes that
have only one function, our blood vessels are multitasking organs. Their major functions
are to carry our oxygenated blood from the heart to
all of our organs and then return our deoxygenated
blood back to the heart. The blood vessels also assist in
the regulation of our blood pressure. They regulate blood flow into
areas that may need more blood. Finally, they allow for the exchange
of nutrients as well as oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and
the tissues. Your blood vessels are very
good at all of these tasks. We have three types of blood vessels, arteries, veins and capillaries. All three work together to carry out
the task we have just learned about. Together, these blood vessels
make up our circulation. You should have a basic understanding
of each type of blood vessel. Arteries carry blood away from the heart. In the systemic circulation, arteries
carry bright red, oxygen rich blood. In the pulmonary system, arteries carry
dark blood that is oxygen depleted. Small arteries are called arterials. Veins on the other hand,
carry blood back to the heart. Because of the opposite direction of flow, they contain oxygen depleted
blood in the systemic system and oxygen rich blood in
the pulmonary circuit. Small veins are called venules. Capillaries are microscopic vessels that are the site of exchange of gases,
nutrients, water and
waste products inside the tissues. Accordingly, capillaries have very thin
walls that consist of one layer of cells. There are slight differences in
the structures of all three vessels. For example, the walls of the arteries
are thicker because the blood pressure is higher in the arteries. Most veins, especially in the legs, have valves that prevent
backflow blood when we stand up. No matter which vessel
you are talking about, the inside of the tube
is called the lumen. This is the central area where
the blood flows through. Functionally speaking, the heart
consists of two side by side pumps. The right heart is the pump for
the pulmonary circulation and the left heart is the pump for
the systemic circulation. There are noticeable differences between
the pulmonary and systemic circulation. The pulmonary circulation is a short
loop consisting of pulmonary arteries that carry oxygen depleted blood from
the right ventricle to the lungs. And pulmonary veins that then carry oxygen
rich blood back to the left atrium. The major blood vessels are the pulmonary
trunk, which divides into the right and left pulmonary arteries and
the pulmonary veins. The pressure in the pulmonary circuit is
much lower than in the systemic circuit. Thus, the arteries have thinner walls
with less smooth muscle tissue and fewer elastic fibers. The systemic circulation, however, is a much longer loop with
a higher blood pressure. The overall combined length of the blood
vessels in the systemic circuit is approximately 50,000 miles. But it can run greater than 100,000
miles in people who are obese. The aorta is the systemic
circulation's main artery. It carries oxygen rich blood
away from the left ventricle. The aorta is the largest blood
vessel of the human body. It starts at the exit of the left
ventricle, just behind the aortic valve. It first travels upwards for
about two inches, which is called the ascending aorta. The ascending aorta,
gives off the two main coronary arteries, the right and left coronary arteries. The ascending aorta then forms
an arch called the aortic arch, which has three major branches
that supply the head, the brain and the upper limbs with blood. These branches are called
the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery and
the left subclavian artery. The aortic arch continues its journey
downwards as the descending aorta. The first part of the descending
aorta is called the thoracic aorta, because it travels in the thorax. The thoracic aorta only
gives off small branches to the thoracic organs and its wall. In the abdomen, the descending aorta
changes its name to the abdominal aorta. The abdominal aorta supplies all
the organs below the diaphragm and the lower limbs with blood. The abdominal aorta
splits into the right and left common iliac arteries that then
supply the lower limbs and the pelvis. Blood flow in the venous system is
opposite to the flow in the arterial system, because it drains
the blood out of the tissues and carries it back towards the heart. All blood from areas below
the diaphragm are carried back by the inferior vena cava,
while all blood from areas above the diaphragm are carried back
by the superior vena cava. Three veins drain most of the blood
from the brain, head and neck. They are the internal jugular vein, the external jugular vein and
the vertebral vein. The venous system of the limbs
is more complicated and varied than the arterial system. We have deep veins that run
close to the arteries and superficial veins that
run close to the surface. When we need to cool down the blood
(and the body),the blood is directed to the superficial veins. When we are cold and
want to prevent further heat loss, the blood stays in the deep veins. Blood from the digestive organs and the spleen is drained to the liver
via the hepatic portal system. After flowing through and
being processed by the liver, the blood exits via the hepatic
veins which carry the blood into the inferior vena cava
just below the diaphragm. The cardiovascular
system's number one job, is to make sure that all of our
cells are supplied with oxygen. This task is split between the heart,
which pumps the blood, and the blood vessels,
which transport the blood to the body. Here is a new term perfusion. Do you know what this means? Perfusion is the term used to describe
the blood flow through an organ or our entire body. Perfusion is so important because
it ensures that all of our cells get the oxygen and
nutrients they need to survive. If neurons and cardiac muscle cells
don't receive oxygen constantly, they will start suffering from
hypoxia within a few minutes. While we relax, the heart pumps
about five liters per minute. This is called our cardiac output at rest. And is what is sufficient for
all of our organs to function properly. You can think of five liters as
being equivalent to a lot of soda, like two and a half big bottles. Once we start exercising,
our cardiac output will double or triple to between ten to
20 liters per minute. Because we need even more
oxygen to power our muscles. This increase in cardiac output
automatically leads to an increase in the blood pressure. The blood zooms with greater
speed throughout your body. What helps our body to know that we
need to increase our cardiac output and the perfusion of the organs? Well, it's the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system
speeds up our heart rate and increases the strength of
our heart's contraction. It also opens up the airways in our
lungs to help us get more oxygen into the lungs and then into the blood. The result is an increase in our
cardiac output and our blood pressure. The sympathetic nervous system
also shifts our blood flow to organs that need more blood,
like our skeletal leg muscles. In contrast, it decreases blood flow to
organs that are not immediately important, such as our digestive organs and
the kidneys. The blood flow to our brain
must remain constant through. Blood flow to our brain does not
vary even though we are exercising.